---
layout: post
title:  'Experience Report: Taking the Online OCP Java SE 11 Developer Certification (1Z0-819)'
author: karsten
featuredImage: java11-omg
excerpt: "OCP Java SE 11 Developer (1Z0-819) is the successor of previous OCA and OCP certifications
combined in one. In this article you will find a personal experience report from taking the online
exam, starting from preparation over study to the exam day.
"
categories: [Java, Certification]
header:
  text: OCP 1Z0-819 Experience Report
  image: post
---

On April 23th 2021 I have done the OCP Java 11 Developer (1Z0-819) exam and passed. Oracle released this new certification
in October 2020 as a successor of Java SE 11 Programmer I (1Z0-815) and Java SE 11 Programmer II (1Z0-816) combined in one.

It was an intensive experience, and I wanted to share something about the motivation, preparation and the exam itself.
The views expressed here are subjective. I try to give you a detailed insight why and how I started to prepare for the exam
to the point where I performed the exam. Hopefully you will find some inspiration and tips for your own journey
to get the certification.

## Why doing the Java Certification?

I'm now working with Java since my study days 25 years ago and got first in touch with the language in its 1.0 version, mainly developing small applets 
and for studying computer languages. From my first day as a consultant back in 2000 I am programming with Java almost every day. Languages, language workbenches 
and developing tools for developers have become a main part of my work, so my Java skills are solid.

I never felt that it is necessary to have a Java certification in order to accomplish to work on complex Java based systems. I believe even for potential customers 
who order profiles of consultants it is obvious from reading mine that I have a rock solid project experience and
whether I have the certificate or not does not really matter. 

So why should I study even basic things again?

It began with an initiative from a colleague of mine at Karakun. He made us aware in our internal channels that Oracle had an offer 
to do the OCP Java 11 Developer exam for just $25, when taking the exam before April 25th 2021. This special price offer was because 
of the 25 year anniversary of Java. So he asked who would be interested to create a working group to do the exam. 
He himself did already a Java certification before. As a Java centric consulting company, several colleagues have done a certification before. 
However, no-one had the Java 11 certification so far, and Java did evolve quite much in the recent years. 
For him, as for me, one main motivation was to dig deeper in the more recent features, which are not all in use in our daily work. 
Some of our newer colleagues joined the working group.

The goal was not just to pass the exam, but really took the chance to study, and push us together to achieve the goal.

## The Study Phase

We started end of February and decided to learn either using the [OCP Oracle Certified Professional Java SE 11 Developer Complete Study Guide 
by Jeanne Boyarsky and Scott Selikoff](https://www.selikoff.net/ocp11-complete/), or using the Oracle video tutorials. The book is 1300 pages, the videos 33 hours. 
Quite a bunch! For the book we've set up a plan until when we would try to work through the chapters. The schedule we set up was:

<figure class="wp-block-table"><table><thead><tr><th scope="col">Week</th><th scope="col">Dates</th><th scope="col">Chapters</th><th scope="col">Num pages</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td>11</td><td>15-21 March</td><td>1 Welcome to Java<br>2 Java Building Blocks<br>3 Operators<br>4 Making Decisions<br>5 Core Java APIs</td><td>~220</td></tr><tr><td>12</td><td>22-28 March</td><td>6 Lambdas and Functional Interfaces<br>7 Methods and Encapsulation<br>8 Class Design<br>9 Advanced Class Design</td><td>~180</td></tr><tr><td>13</td><td>29-4 April</td><td>10 Exceptions<br>11 Modules<br>12 Java Fundamentals<br>13 Annotations</td><td>~200</td></tr><tr><td>14</td><td>5-11 April</td><td>14 Generics and Collections<br>15 Functional Programming<br>16 Exceptions, Assertions, and Localization</td><td>~200</td></tr><tr><td>15</td><td>12-18 April</td><td>17 Modular Applications<br>18 Concurrency<br>19 I/O<br>20 NIO.2</td><td>~220</td></tr><tr><td>16</td><td>19-25 April</td><td>21 JDBC<br>22 Security</td><td>~100</td></tr></tbody></table></figure>

At Karakun we have an education budget that we can use on our behalf, but to be honest,
preparing such an exam also involves a high degree of spare time. We are also quite busy with our daily projects, and to take time it is not 
always the right time in a project.

As it comes, at that time I was deeply busy with my current main customer project. It afforded almost all of my time, and there was almost no room to
got started. Fast I was lacking behind the schedule and thought it is not possible to work through the complete book in that time. But then came easter
vacation and "thanks" to the corona crises and bad weather there was anyway time left then. Thus I decided to work through the chapters almost each vacation
day. Normally I do not much work during vacation and use the time to relax and spend time with my family. Working through the book was the opposite
of relaxing, and family came also sometime a bit short. But now I came back on the time track.

At the end of vacation, 1,5 weeks before the exam, I completed chapter 19 of 22, leaving "only" 4 chapters to read to practice exam questions. But then I was 
starting a second project, and the main project required focus, too. So it was left to the evenings and weekends to complete the preparation.

## What I learned from studying the Book

I am quite confident in my Java skills for daily work. However, goal of the study was to learn especially in areas that I do not use so frequently
in my daily work and also to get into details. When you have a 1300 pages study guide and
do not learn many things from it, then you are doing something tremendously well or horribly wrong.

So I went really through the book page by page, reading even the very basics. Normally I'd tend to just skip parts which I'd think I already know,
but I felt it was even worth reading thus and, uhm, study. It felt right to do so. After the introduction part there is the first set of Assessment Tests
to get a feeling what is awaiting you in the exam questions. And there I felt that they were harder to answer then expected. I failed with quite a lot.
From then on I knew that you'll really have to be prepared well to pass.

The book makes it a bit harder for you, because it does not tell how many answers are correct when multiple are. In the real exam you always know 
how many answers you have to check. When doing the review questions after each chapter, I failed with rather many because there was an answer option
checked too much or too few.

For all questions I answered wrong I read the explanation in the appendix. This helps you to understand the topic in detail and also where you have to look
for tricks. Of course, compilation issues are often a trick, and as the book recommends you'll always have to ask yourself at first "Does it compile?". But you'll
learn also other trick questions. After I finished the book I went through all wrongly answered questions again. I still failed with some of them, but the hit
rate was much better.

Overall the Java SE 11 Developer Complete Study Guide is very well written. It describes everything in detail, one topic after the other without
overlapping or taking anything for granted. Also, the code examples are well chosen and helpful for understanding.
The writing style was very easy to follow. I really can recommend reading the book!

I learned really many details where I do not think about anymore. The compiler, the IDE, Dr. Google or Mr. Stackoverflow helps me to correct things when I'm
doing something wrong, and fixing is often easy. The book helped to focus on those details and think in front.

## About certain exam topics

You'll need to learn many details of the language and its tools. Some of them you'll likely never need. Some you even probably should not use. You'll see
that with Java you could write code that is more complicated to understand than Perl scripts written by a drunk gorilla.

Especially tricky were to me nested loops with incrementing different scoped variables with either pre- or post-increment operator and proper usage of `break` or `continue` on labeled loops. To answer
those questions correctly you'll have to track the variable state. Although you really should understand how and when to use `break` and `continue`,
doing this together with complicated incremented variable state just makes knots in your brain. During study I took the time to follow the program flow
and state, but for the exam I decided to just skip such a question. It just takes too much time, and one question is as much worth as the other.

For the exam you'll learn all the command line switches and their inconsistencies when they use single or double hyphen. Also options for commands like `jmod`.
Actually I did not know that command before. So my taking was here that this command exists and roughly its purpose. But why you need to memorize
which command line options it offers and get tricked by options that might look right? When I need to know what option a command offers, I'll ask for it in
a terminal. Of course you should be aware of the most important commands and the options you would most likely use. It does not make you a better
programmer to know options you very seldomly would use.

I learned a lot on Java serialization. Actually more then I would like to. Nowadays I don't really care much about Java object serialization. The basic
rules are well understood. It was quite interesting to learn the order of object initialization, i.e. which constructor is called or not and in which order. 
I never really cared so far. I read about options to influence what and how state is (de-) serialized which I'll never use again. However, now I know
there are more options available than I was aware of before.

Of course there were also topics which I use daily, but where the book really helped me to learn and think about in detail. I especially enjoyed here
the chapters about Generics, Functional Programming, Modular Applications, Concurrency and NIO.2. This really helped me to improve my hard skills.

## Mock Exams

Additionally to the Study Guide I ordered the [1Z0-819 Mock Exams from Enthuware](https://enthuware.com/java-certification-mock-exams/oracle-certified-professional/ocp-java-11-exam-1z0-819).
I read about them when I was looking into some threads about the certification in the [OCP Forum at Coderanch](https://coderanch.com/f/24/java-programmer-OCPJP).
I was at this forum to report some small possible errata in the book. In the threads some developers were mentioning the mock exams and I thought
it could be worth to try some additionally to the review questions in the book.

Before the exam I just had to do 7 of those mock exams (there are 22 with ~50 questions each). After doing this I can really recommend to use them
when preparing for the exam. While it is possible here to get offered how many answers you actually have to choose, the questions themselves
felt partially even trickier than in the book. 

You can either review them after finishing the complete test or choose to be able to review after each question. I started with the first option and reviewed 
the questions where I failed. The different options are commented and help to understand the topic in more detail. For the last mock exams I decided
to use the option to review after each question, and used this to understand also for correct answers if they were answered correctly because I really
hit the nail there. Sometimes you might be just randomly right, and I avoided false positives. Of course, this takes time then.

Overall the mock exams do quite well simulate the real exam in their content and extend. You'll get a set of ~50 questions distributed over all topics,
just like in the exam. I did not enforce a time box of 90 mins like in the exam. Estimated each mock exam including reviews took 2 - 2,5h.

# Exam Check-in

Finally the exam day came. It was time to check in. You'll receive a week before a mail from Pearson VUE asking you to [check the system requirements
and exam policies](https://home.pearsonvue.com/oracle/onvue). For the system test you'll need to download the testing software, which requires that you don't have any other program
running (except for Finder on macOS). Make sure to read [Tips on taking an OnVUE exam](https://home.pearsonvue.com/onvue-tips). Honestly, I did not 
do this and it would have avoided some stress. Let me tell what went wrong for me.

I started the login procedure as recommended 30 minutes before planned start. You'll need to start the OnVUE software and you'll get a code from the login link 
in the email you received. Before I mostly cleaned my desk except for the external monitor I wanted to work with my Notebook. You need to set the camera
you are using at first. For me, I had the notebook closed and chose the external webcam. The software showed me then the camera stream, so it looked
fine so far.

The next step involved using the smartphone for the check-in procedure. You have 2 options to continue: Either get an SMS with a link, or enter the link yourself.
I chose the SMS, but unfortunately I did not receive the message. The OnVUE software was waiting until you continue on the smartphone and I was blocked.
I needed to restart and the software and then entered the link manually. Here a QR code would have helped a bit.

I opened a link and it got some information. One of them was that no external monitors are allowed. I wanted to avoid problems and unplugged mine, switching
to the notebook's display and camera. If I would have read the tips carefully then there you read that an external monitor is actually allowed
when the notebook is closed. I was just confused by the message on the web page. Then the check-in software requested to make a photo of yourself, then front and back of your identity document and photos of your room in front of desk, 
back, left and right.

Finally I was done there and got into the waiting queue. There was a counter how many people are checked in before you. I got about position 25, and it
took between 5 and 10 minutes until I was in front.

Now a proctorer opened a chat window and wrote that he could not see my video stream. This will be surely because I unplugged the external monitor and
the webcam during the check-in procedure. However, since the software still showed me in a video stream, I was surprised that the proctorer did not see
it, too. So I needed to restart the software again and go through the check-in procedure again. It was already close to the planned starting time.
The check-in involved again opening the link, fortunately this time I did not need to take the photos again.

I came back into the check-in queue, and there it said immediately that I was next. I expected that since I was already about to be checked in and just
needed to restart the software. However, it took ~10 minutes until a proctorer contacted me. The official test start time passed meanwhile and I was a
bit nervous. Additionally because the software displayed I'm next and literally nothing happened.

When I got the call from the proctorer she asked me to take the notebook and show around my desk. I had to remove some more stuff from the desk, and finally
the exam was released.

## The Exam

Now it was finally time. All or nothing! When I started the test the counter began. 90 minutes for 50 questions.

The questions were completely distributed over the topics that are covered by the Study Guide. From datatypes, loops, lambdas, modular applications to
security and JDBC. The mock exams simulate this quite well, the questions are distributed similar.

You can skip questions that you will answer later. When completing the last question you have the option to answer all unanswered question.
One tip I can give is: Do this. Decide fast if a question will take you long to understand. This can be either by more code, or more complex code.
Since each question weights as much as others, just risk that you'll not answer those and get points on others. You'll need to decide this fast!
Of course, you should do this only for few questions. I had about 4. Already planned for skipping was nested labeled loops where you need to answer
where to insert `break <LABEL>` or `continue <LABEL>` to get a specific output. I had such a question and immediately skipped it. The time is well
spent on others.

Overall the questions were not easy and often tricky, but you know that from practicing the questions in the Study Guide and the mock exams.
I had the feeling that the mock exam questions were a bit harder than the questions I had in the exam. So if you are doing well on those tests,
you are well prepared!

There were some questions of course that cause compilation errors. As recommended follow the call sequence and ask yourself "Does it compile?".
I spotted some errors like datatype conversion, extending/overriding final classes / methods, and reducing visibility of overridden
methods. Could be that I missed some, at the end I made of course some mistakes. You'll get at the end the topic areas where you made mistakes
but do not see the questions again.

I had a moderate paste in going through the questions. Each question I read with care and also the answers. After doing this I was often
clear which options I would answer. Sometimes I was not completely sure and marked those questions for review later when I was done with all.

At the end I had less about 10 minutes for the skipped and marked questions. I needed that time to answer the skipped ones, and no time was
left to review unsure ones. For the mentioned nested loop question I just did a wild guess and it surely was wrong.

After the time was over the exam finished automatically and you get an immediate answer if you passed and the correct answer percentage.
I was glad that I passed and this was all over now.

# Conclusion

Doing this exam is an intense experience and requires well preparation, even for experienced Java developers. When you are experienced take
this as a chance to learn details and challenge yourself. Hopefully you are not doing the exam because you need just the badge in your CV and
just want to pass somehow, but really learn and improve your skills.

I recommend studying the OCP Java 11 Complete Study Guide in detail, and additionally practicing with the Mock Exams from Enthuware.
If you do this you are really well prepared for taking the exam! However, do not underestimate the effort for doing so. Wouldn't I have sacrificed
some of the vacation and spare time, I would not have made it through the study material. I might have passed, but when I would have before
studying the whole material, I won't have touched them again. Not all of our study group made it through the material because they did not 
have enough time besides their regular work. They decided to just make the exam later, then of course at regular cost, when they learned completely
for it. Just trying to pass was not the right thing for them. 

On exam day make sure that you check in early and have if possible nothing then your computer on the desk and within arm reach.

Take enough time to read the questions and their answers carefully. Follow the program flow from the main method to what is instantiated and called.

Skip questions immediately when they'll cost you valuable time reading and understanding them. You can do this for 4-6 questions during the exam. Make sure
that you have 10 minutes left to answer them later. For the most tricky ones, just randomly check options.

I hope this article gave you some valuable hints for preparing your exam. For this I wish you all the best. You'll make it with the right preparation!
